# Crossover Study

This repository contains the code for my paper for the GECCO 2025 Workshop [Analysing algorithmic behaviour of optimisation heuristics](https://gecco-2025.sigevo.org/Workshop?itemId=2359) titled "[Tracing Genome Influence in Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms](TODO:DOI)". This repository contains the code to generate and evaluate the test data.


## Folder Structure
There are three folders for the code, data and figures generated by the evaluation:
- *code* - contains all the code, most importantly the script for generating the test data and the jupyter notebook used for evaluation. Besides the test scripts, code from the preliminary evaluation as well as the sub-repository for the T-EA is also here.
- *data* - is the output folder for the test data, both for the preliminary test and the actual benchmark. Also already contains the compressed test data.
- *figures* - contains the generated figures from the evaluation of the data.

## Installing

The required packages can be found in "requirements.txt".
```bash
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip3 install requirements.txt
```
Besides the packages, the t-ea pymoo implementation is required to run the code in this repository.

Finally, two sub-directories are needed for the test problems and the heritage tracking. They can be initalized as follows:
```bash #TODO: this needs changing!
git clone https://github.com/tobeneck/crossover_study.git
cd crossover_study
git submodule init
git submuodule update
cd ../pymoo_problems
git submodule init
git submuodule update
```

For more information on the heritage tracking process of the traceable evolutionary algorithm (T-EA) you can refer to [this paper](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9504916), the implementation can be found in [this git repository](https://github.com/tobeneck/tea_pymoo).

The repository containing the problem implementations outside of pymoo can be found [here](https://github.com/tobeneck/pymoo_problems).


## Generating the Test Data

Generating the test data is done in a few separate steps. The data will always be saved in the *data* folder.

1. Generating the initial populations and seed individuals:
```bash
cd code
python3 generate_initial_pop.py
python3 generate_seed_individuals.py
```

2. Run the actual tests:
```bash
python3 e_and_c_benchmark.py
```

3. Calculate the hypervolume performance indicator:
```bash
python3 calc_HV.py
```

4. Evaluate the tests. You can use the rpovided notebooks:
- *eval_genome_range.ipynb* - visualized the variable ranges of the genome for the MOPs used in the Paper.
- *eval_trace_data.ipynb* - contains all visualizations done for the trace data of the t-ea.
- *eval_performance.ipynb* - contains all visualizations fo the performance data.


## Citation

Please cite this paper if you use this repository in your work:
Will be added if this work gets published.
